Aim: Study of the features of firewall in providing network security and to set Firewall
Security in windows.

Firewall in Windows
Windows comes with two firewalls that work together. One is the Windows Firewall, and
the other is Windows Firewall with Advanced Security (WFAS). The main difference
between them is the complexity of the rules configuration. Windows Firewall uses simple
rules that directly relate to a program or a service. The rules in WFAS can be configured
based on protocols, ports, addresses and authentication. By default, both firewalls come with
predefined set of rules that allow us to utilize network resources. This includes things like
browsing the web, receiving e-mails, etc. Other standard firewall exceptions are File and
Printer Sharing, Network Discovery, Performance Logs and Alerts, Remote
Administration, Windows Remote Management, Remote Assistance, Remote Desktop,
Windows Media Player, Windows Media Player Network Sharing Service With firewall in
Windows 7 we can configure inbound and outbound rules. By default, all outbound traffic is
allowed, and inbound responses to that traffic are also allowed. Inbound traffic initiated from
external sources is automatically blocked.
Sometimes we will see a notification about a blocked program which is trying to access
network resources. In that case we will be able to add an exception to our firewall in order to
allow traffic from the program in the future.
Windows 7 comes with some new features when it comes to firewall. For example, "fullstealth" feature blocks other computers from performing operating system fingerprinting. OS
fingerprinting is a malicious technique used to determine the operating system running on
the host machine. Another feature is "boot-time filtering". This feature ensures that the
firewall is working at the same time when the network interface becomes active, which was
not the case in previous versions of Windows.
When we first connect to some network, we are prompted to select a network location.
This feature is known as Network Location Awareness (NLA). This feature enables us to
assign a network profile to the connection based on the location. Different network profiles
contain different collections of firewall rules. In Windows 7, different network profiles can
be configured on different interfaces. For example, our wired interface can have different
profile than our wireless interface. There are three different network profiles available:
 Public
 Home/Work - private network
 Domain - used within a domain
